Add Part I to Link Tracking with StimulusReflex (#156)
rootstrap/blog: content/Link Tracking with StimulusReflex - Part I.md

> # Link Tracking with StimulusReflex - Part I

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Link Tracking with StimulusReflex 
```

> This is the first of a series about StimulusReflex, a new tool to help you bring Rails to the era of the backend-side-managed frontends. I was surprised to see that [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet) use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first of a series about StimulusReflex, a new tool to help you bring Rails to the era of the backend-side-managed frontends. I was surprised to see that [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet) use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.
```

> This is the first of a series about StimulusReflex, a new tool to help you bring Rails to the era of the backend-side-managed frontends. I was surprised to see that [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet) use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first of a  about StimulusReflex, a new tool to help you bring Rails to the era of the backend-side-managed frontends. I was surprised to see that [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet) use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.
```

Luckily the team at [StimulusReflex's folks](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com) created a gem that does just that. I'll show you how to use it by building a link shortener with this new and exciting technology. In this part of the series, we'll focus on setting up and running StimulusReflex so we can build awesome features for our next project.

![Header image](images/stimulus_reflex.jpeg)

## Initializing the project

To get started we are just going to follow the [original docs](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com/setup) and run the default `rails new` generator preconfigured to use [StimulusJS](https://stimulusjs.org) as the Javascript backend and the name of our project (`sho_lin` is short for **Sho**rtened **Lin**k, get it? I promise it's the first and only pun):

```bash
rails new sho_lin --webpack=stimulus -d postgresql
```

> By the way, StimuluJS is a frontend framework concerned with adding functionality to the HTML rather than controlling the whole DOM. If you wish to learn more about it, there's a [recent post](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2020/07/introduction-stimulusjs/) that explains how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the way, StimuluJS is a front-end framework concerned with adding functionality to the HTML rather than controlling the whole DOM. If you wish to learn more about it, here's a [recent post](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2020/07/introduction-stimulusjs/) that explains how it works.
```

## Testing that StimulusJS works

> Even though this framework deserves a more in-depth explanation, let's do a quick example to make sure everything works as expected and have a basic idea of how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though this framework deserves a more in-depth explanation,  let's work on a quick example to make sure everything works as expected and to provide you with insights on how it works.
```

First, we'll create a basic controller with an index action to just render some HTML

```bash
rails g controller pages index
```

And we'll make this action our new root in our `config/routes.rb`

```ruby
# change
get 'pages/index'

# to
root 'pages#index'
```

And we'll dive into some Javascript as well by changing the `HelloController` in `app/javascript/controllers/hello_controller.js` for the following class

```javascript
import { Controller } from "stimulus"

export default class extends Controller {
  static targets = ["output"]

  sayHello() {
    this.outputTarget.textContent = "Hello, Stimulus!"
  }
}
```

Now we just need to bind it to our markup in `app/views/pages/index.html.erb` by using some
data attributes

```html
<div data-controller="hello">
  <button data-action="click->hello#sayHello">Say hello</button>
  <h1 data-target="hello.output"></h1>
</div>
```

> Now if you run the server with `rails s` and go to `http://localhost:3000` you'll see that when you click on the "Say hello" button you'll get back "Hello, Stimulus!". I think the code it's pretty self explanatory but I'll give a quick walkthrough anyway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now if you run the server with `rails s` and go to `http://localhost:3000` you'll see that when you click on the "Say hello" button you'll get back "Hello, Stimulus!". I think the code it's pretty self-explanatory but I'll give a quick walkthrough anyway.
```

  end
```

And change the `h1` tag in `app/views/pages/index.html.erb` to show our message

```html
<h1><%= @message %></h1>
```

You *DO NOT* need to add the `@message` variable in the `PagesController`. If you do set it remember to use the `||=` operator like `@message ||= "Some default"` since otherwise it would override the Reflex's value.

Now we'll adapt our frontend to call the HelloReflex by updating the HelloController in `app/javascript/controllers/hello_controller.js` to use StimulusReflex.

First import `StimulusReflex`

```javascript
import StimulusReflex from 'stimulus_reflex'
```

Then register the controller in the connect function

```javascript
  connect() {
    StimulusReflex.register(this)
  }
```

And finally, change the `sayHello` function to call the Reflex on the server

```javascript
  sayHello() {
    this.stimulate('Hello#greet')
  }
```

Tho whole file should look like this:

```javascript
import { Controller } from "stimulus"
import StimulusReflex from 'stimulus_reflex'

export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    StimulusReflex.register(this)
  }

  sayHello() {
    this.stimulate('Hello#greet')
  }
}
```

> You can test it again and you should get back "Hello, StimulusReflex!". How did it happen? Behind the scenes, StimulusReflex opens up a WebSocket connection and runs the Reflex's action and then the Controller's action sending the resulting HTML over the wire. On the client's side it does a diff between the result and the current DOM performing the minimum updates to update the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test it again and you should get back "Hello, StimulusReflex!". How did it happen? Behind the scenes, StimulusReflex opens up a WebSocket connection and runs the Reflex's action and then the Controller's action sending the resulting HTML over the wire. On the client's side, it does a diff between the result and the current DOM performing the minimum updates to update the latter.
```

## Up next

> We now have a basic Hello World example up and for which you can see the whole code on these [two](https://github.com/brunvez/sho_lin/commit/7a7a81f8c702d7d15402bf54ef49c701ed3ac46e) [commits](https://github.com/brunvez/sho_lin/commit/e3dd684bd6c00eca4d847bbf7f70d0cefe4e8a26). In the next part, we'll add some code to list and manage our links all with the best features from Rails. So keep posted!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now have a basic Hello World example up where you can see the whole code on these [two](https://github.com/brunvez/sho_lin/commit/7a7a81f8c702d7d15402bf54ef49c701ed3ac46e) [commits](https://github.com/brunvez/sho_lin/commit/e3dd684bd6c00eca4d847bbf7f70d0cefe4e8a26). In the next part, we'll add some code to list and manage our links with the best features from Rails. Stay posted!
```

# Link Tracking with StimulusReflex - Part I

era of the backend-side-managed frontends. This might sound weird but there's been a couple of projects, starting with [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet), which use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.

> This is better defined by the [StimulusReflex's folks](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com) which as you may have guessed is a gem that does just that. I'm not going to explain this any further in words but rather I'll show you how to use it by building a link shortener with this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily the team at [StimulusReflex's folks](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com) created a gem that does just that. I'll show you how to use it by building a link shortener with this new and exciting technology. In this part of the series, we'll focus on setting up and running StimulusReflex so we can build awesome features for our next project.
```

> new and exciting technology. In this part of the series, we'll focus on getting up and running so we can build awesome features for our project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

# Link Tracking with StimulusReflex - Part I

> This is the introduction to a series on using StimulusReflex, a new tool to bring Rails to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> era of the backend-managed-frontends. This might sound weird but there's been a couple of projects, starting with [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet), which use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
era of the backend-side-managed frontends. This might sound weird but there's been a couple of projects, starting with [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet), which use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.
```

> era of the backend-side-managed frontends. This might sound weird but there's been a couple of projects, starting with [Phoenix LiveView](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix_live_view/Phoenix.LiveView.html) and following with things like [Motion](https://github.com/unabridged/motion) and [Sockpuppet](https://github.com/jonathan-s/django-sockpuppet), which use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first of a series about StimulusReflex, a new tool to help you bring Rails to the era of the backend-side-managed frontends. I was surprised to see that Phoenix LiveView, Motion, and Sockpuppet use WebSockets to push updates from the server to the client and update the DOM accordingly.
```

This is better defined by the [StimulusReflex's folks](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com) which as you may have guessed is a gem that does just that. I'm not going to explain this any further in words but rather I'll show you how to use it by building a link shortener with this
new and exciting technology. In this part of the series, we'll focus on getting up and running so we can build awesome features for our project.

![Header image](images/stimulus reflex - part I.jpeg)

## Initializing the project

To get started we are just going to follow the [original docs](https://docs.stimulusreflex.com/setup) and run the default `rails new` generator preconfigured to use [StimulusJS](https://stimulusjs.org) as the Javascript backend and the name of our project (`sho_lin` is short for **Sho**rtened **Lin**k, get it? I promise it's the first and only pun):

```bash
rails new sho_lin --webpack=stimulus -d postgresql
```

> By the way, StimuluJS it's a frontend framework concerned with adding functionality to the HTML rather than controlling the whole DOM. If you wish to learn more about it, there's a [recent post](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2020/07/introduction-stimulusjs/) that explains how it works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By the way, StimulusJS is a frontend framework concerned with adding functionality to the HTML rather than controlling the whole DOM. If you wish to learn more about it, there's a [recent post](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2020/07/introduction-stimulusjs/) that explains how it works.
```

## Testing that StimulusJS works

Even though this framework deserves a more in-depth explanation, let's do a quick example to make sure everything works as expected and have a basic idea of how it works.

First, we'll create a basic controller with an index action to just render some HTML

```bash
rails g controller pages index
```

And we'll make this action our new root

```ruby

> # change

Reviewer 3: maybe it's obvious in this case but you could always explain the file you are talking about like this

```ruby
# config/routes.rb

# change
# get 'pages/index'

# to
root 'pages#index'
```

```html
<div data-controller="hello">
  <button data-action="click->hello#sayHello">Say hello</button>
  <h1 data-target="hello.output"></h1>
</div>
```

Now if you run the server with `rails s` and go to `http://localhost:3000` you'll see that when you click on the "Say hello" button you'll get back "Hello, Stimulus!". I think the code it's pretty self explanatory but I'll give a quick walkthrough anyway.

Here we are just telling StimulusJS to hook the controller prefixed with `Hello` scoped to that HTML tree. That will start looking for specific data attributes which in this case are `data-action` and `data-target`. The first accepts a syntax to call specific methods on the instance of the controller on a given event, currently set to invoke the `sayHello` method when the click event occurs. The latter binds the text to a target, which is just like a reference to the element but more at the same time, keeping them synchronized.

So in this case when we set the `textContent` of our `outputTarget` the text will immediately appear on our `h1` tag. Keep this concept in the back of your mind since we'll keep using it throughout the series.

## Adding Reflex to our previous example

> Now that we've seen how StimulusJS works let's get down to business. The first step it's to install it, which is extremely simple

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now that we've seen how StimulusJS works let's get down to business. The first step is to install it, which is extremely simple
```

```bash
bundle add stimulus_reflex
bundle exec rails stimulus_reflex:install
```

Then let's do some changes to the generated code by renaming `app/reflexes/example_reflex.rb` to `app/reflexes/hello_reflex.rb` and adjust the code inside as well

```ruby
# change
class ExampleReflex < ApplicationReflex

# to
class HelloReflex < ApplicationReflex
```

And add a handler method called `#greet` to differentiate it from our frontend binding

```ruby
  def greet
    @message = 'Hello, StimulusReflex!'
  end
```

And change the `h1` tag in `app/views/pages/index.html.erb` to show our message

```html
<h1><%= @message %></h1>
```

> You *DO NOT* need to add the `@message` variable in the `PagesController`. If you do set it remember to use the `||=` operator like `@message ||= "Some default"` since otherwise it would override the Reflex's value.

Reviewer 5: I would remove the `do` here from `If you do set...`

Author: How do you mean?

Now we'll adapt our frontend to call the HelloReflex by updating the HelloController in `app/javascript/controllers/hello_controller.js` to use StimulusReflex.

First import `StimulusReflex`

```javascript
import StimulusReflex from 'stimulus_reflex'
```

Then register the controller in the connect function

```javascript
  connect() {
    StimulusReflex.register(this)
  }
```

And finally, change the `sayHello` function to call the Reflex on the server

```javascript
  sayHello() {
    this.stimulate('Hello#greet')
  }
```

Tho whole file should look like this:

```javascript
import { Controller } from "stimulus"
import StimulusReflex from 'stimulus_reflex'

export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    StimulusReflex.register(this)
  }

  sayHello() {
    this.stimulate('Hello#greet')
  }
}
```

> You can test it again and you should get back "Hello, StimulusReflex!". How did it happen? Behind the scenes, StimulusReflex opens up a WebSocket connection and runs the Reflex's action and then the Controller's action sending the resulting HTML over the wire. On the client's side it does a diff between the result and the current DOM and does the needed minimum updates to update the latter.

Reviewer 4: `does the minimum updates needed to update the latter.` maybe?
